the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
view additional materials from hundreds
of MIT courses visit MIT opencourseware
at
ocw.mit.edu so today's lecture is on
sorting we'll be talking about specific
sorting algorithms today
I want to start by motivating why we're
interested in sorting which should be
fairly
easy and then I want to discuss a
particular sorting algorithm that's
called insertion sort that's probably
the simplest sorting algorithm you can
write it's uh five lines of code um it's
not the best sorting algorithm that's
out there and so we'll try and improve
it and we'll also talk about merge sort
which is a divide and conquer Al
algorithm and that's going to
motivate the last thing that I want to
spend time on which is recurrences and
how you solve recurrences and typically
the recurrences that we'll be looking at
in6 are going to come from divide and
conquer problems like merge sort but
you'll see this over and
over so let's talk about why we're
interested in
sorting now there's some fairly obvious
applications like if you want to
maintain a phone book you got a bunch
of names and numbers corresponding to a
telephone
directory and you want to keep them in
sorted order so it's easy to search mp3
organizers spreadsheets Etc so there's
lots of obvious
applications there's
also some interesting problems that
become
easy Once items are
sorted and one example of
that is finding a median for
example so let's say that you have a
bunch of items in an array
a0 through
n and a0 through n contains n numbers
and they're not
sorted when you sort you turn this into
B 0 through
n where if it's just numbers then you
may sort them in increasing order or
decreasing order let's just call it
increasing order for now or if they
record and they're not numbers then you
have to provide a comparison function to
determine which record is smaller than
another record and that's another input
that you have to have in order to do the
Sorting so it doesn't really matter what
the items are as long as you have the
comparison function think of it as less
than or equal to and if you have that
and it's a straightforward you obviously
to check that three is less than four
Etc but it may be a little more
complicated uh for for more
sophisticated sorting applications but
the bottom line is that if you have your
algorithm that takes a comparison
function as an input you're going to be
able to go after a certain amount of
time get
b0n now if you want to Def the median of
the set of numbers that were originally
in the array a uh what would you do once
you have the sorted array B
yep oh absolutely but um there's u i I'm
you know this is sort of a side effect
of having a sorted
list I'm I'm you know if you happen to
have a sorted list there's many ways
that U you could um uh imagine you know
building up a sorted list one way is you
have something that's completely
unsorted and you run insertion sort or
merge sort um another way would be to
maintain a sorted list as you're getting
items put into the list okay so if you
happen to have a sorted list and you
need to have the sorted list for some
reason the point I'm making here is that
finding the median is easy okay and it's
easy because all you have to do is to go
look at depending on whether n is odd or
even and look at B of n /2 right that
that would give you the median because
you'd have a bunch of numbers uh that
are less than that and and the equal set
of numbers that are greater than that
which is the definition of median all
right so this
is not necessarily the best way as you
pointed out of finding the median but um
it's constant time if you have a sorted
list all right that's the point I wanted
to make um there are other things that
you could do and this came up in Eric's
lecture which is the notion of binary
search finding an element in an array a
specific element you have an A list of
uh items again a 0 through n and you're
looking
for a specific number or
item you could obviously
scan the array and that would take you
linear time to find this
item if the array happened to be
sorted
then you can find this in logarithmic
time using what's called B binary search
okay and binary search let's say you're
looking for a specific item let's call
it
K binary search roughly speaking would
work like you go compare K to again B of
n /
2 and decide given that b is sorted you
you get to look at one half of the array
uh if B of n /2 is not exactly k then I
uh well if it's exactly K you're done
otherwise you look at the left half you
do your divide and conquer Paradigm and
you can do this in logarithmic time all
right so keep this in mind because uh
bind research is going to come up in
today's lecture and and again in other
lectures it's really a a great Paradigm
of divide and conquer probably the
simplest and it essentially takes
something that's linear
uh a linear search and turns it into
logarithmic search so those are a couple
of uh problems that become easy if you
have a sorted list and there's some you
know not so
obvious
applications of sorting for example data
compression if you wanted to compress a
file one of the things that you could do
is to and it's just a it's a set of
items you could uh uh you could sort the
items and that automatically finds
duplicates and you could say um if I
have 100 items that are all identical
I'm going to compress the file by
representing the item once and then
having a number associated with the
frequency of that item s similar to what
document distance does document distance
is can be viewed as a way of compressing
your initial input obviously you lose
the you know the works of Shakespeare or
whatever it was and and it becomes a
bunch of words and frequencies but it is
something that uh that uh compresses the
input um and gives you a different
representation and so people use sorting
in as a sub routine in data
compression computer Graphics uses
sorting most of the time when you render
scenes in computer Graphics you have
many layers corresponding to the scenes
it turns out that I that in computer
Graphics most of the time you're
actually rendering front to back because
uh when you have a big opaque object in
front uh you want to render that first
uh so you don't have to worry about
everything that's uded by this big Opa
object and that makes things more
efficient and so you keep things sorted
front to back most of the time in
computer Graphics rendering but some of
the time if you're worried about
transparency you have to render things
back to front so typically you have
sorted lists corresponding to the
different objects in both orders both
increasing order and decreasing order
and you're maintaining that so sorting
is a a real important sub routine in
pretty much any sophisticated
application you look at so it's
worthwhile to look at the variety of
sorting algorithms that are out there
and we're going to do some simple ones
today but if you go look at Wikipedia
and and do a Google search there's you
know all sorts of sorts like cocktail
sort and bonic sort
and and what have you and there's
reasons why each of these sorting
algorithms exist because in specific
cases they end up you know winning on on
types of inputs or types of problems all
right so let's take a look at our first
sorting algorithm I'm not going to write
code but it will be in the notes and it
is in your document
distance python files but I'll just give
you pseudo code here and walk through
what insertion sort looks like because
the purpose of really describing this
algorithm to you is to analyze its
complexity we need to do some counting
here with respect to this
algorithm to figure out how fast it's
going to run in and what the worst case
complexity is
so what is insertion sort for I = 1 2
through n given a sorted excuse me given
an input to be
sorted what we're going to do is we're
going to
insert a ofi in the right position and
we can assume
that we are sort of Midway through the
Sorting process where we have
sorted a0 through
i-1 and we're going to expand this to
this array to have I +1 elements and a
ofi is going to get inserted into the
the correct
position and we're going to do this by
pairwise
swaps
down to the
correct position for the number that is
initially in a
ofi all right so let's go
through an example of this we're going
to sort in increasing order just have
six
numbers and initially we have 5 2 4
613 and we're going to take a look at
this and you start with the index one or
the second element because the very
first element it's a single element and
it's already sorted by definition but
you you start from here and this is what
we call our
key um and that's essentially a a
pointer to where we're at right now and
the key keeps moving to the right as we
go through the different steps of the
algorithm um and so what you do is you
look at this and you have um this is a
of I that's your key and uh you have a
of 0 to Z which is
and uh this since we want to sort in
increasing order uh this is not sorted
and so we do a swap so what this would
do in the in in this step is to do a
swap and we would
go
obtain uh 2 5 4 61 3 so all that's
happened here in this step in the very
first step where the key is in the
second position is what one swap swap
happened
um now your key is here at item four
again you need to put four into the
right spot and so you do pair wise swaps
and in this case you have to do one Swap
and you get 2 four five and you're done
with this this
iteration so what happens
here is you have two 4
five
613 and
now the key is over here at six now at
this point things um are kind of easy in
the sense that you look at it and you
say well six is I know that this part is
already sorted um six is greater than
five so you have to do nothing so
there's there's nothing there's no swaps
that happen in this step um
so all that happens here is you're going
to move the key to one step to the
right so you have 2 4 five 6 1 3 and
your key is now at
one uh here you have to do more work now
you
see one aspect of the complexity of this
algorithm given that you're doing pair
wise swaps uh the way this algorithm was
defined in pseudo code out there was I'm
going to use pairwise swaps to find the
correct position so what you're going to
do is you're going to have to swap first
one and six and then you'll swap one is
over here so you'll you'll swap um this
position and that position and then
you'll
swap essentially do four swaps uh to get
to the point where um you have 1 2 4 5 6
3 so
this is the result
1 2 4 five 6 three and the important
thing to understand here is that you've
done four swaps to get one to the
correct position now you can imagine a
different data structure where you move
this over there and you shift them all
to the right but in fact that shifting
of these four elements is going to be
computed in our model as four operations
or four steps anyway so there's no
getting away from the fact that you have
to do four things here uh and the way
insertion sort the code that we have for
insertion
sort does this is by using pairwise
swaps so we're almost
done now we have the
key at um
three and now three needs to get put
into the correct position and so you got
to do a few swaps this is the last
step and what happens here here is three
is going to get swapped with
six uh and then three needs to get
swapped with five and then three needs
to get swapped with four and then since
three is greater than two uh you're done
so you have 1 2 3 4 five
six and that's
it so
analysis how many steps do I have
yep no and how many steps do I
have um I guess that was a that wasn't a
good question if I think of a step as
being a movement of the key how many
steps do I
have I have uh Theta n steps uh and uh
in this case you can think of it as uh
as n minus one steps since you started
with two but let's just call it Theta n
steps in terms of key
positions and you're right it is uh n
Square because at any given step it's
quite possible that I have to do theta n
work and one example is this one right
here where I had to do four swaps and in
general you can construct a scenario
where um at towards the end of the
algorithm you you'd have to do theta n
work but if you had a list that was
reverse sorted you would essentially
have to do on an average n by two swaps
as you go through each of the steps and
that's Theta n so each
step is Theta
n
swaps okay and when I say swaps I could
also say say each step is Theta n
Compares and swaps all right and this is
going to be important because I'm going
to ask you an interesting question in a
minute but let me
summarize um what I have here is a Theta
n Square algorithm the reason this is a
Theta n Square algorithm is because I
have Theta n
steps and each step is Theta
n when I'm counting what do I what am I
counting in terms of operations the
Assumption here unspoken assumption is
being that an operation is a compare and
a swap and they're essentially equal in
cost okay and in most computers that's
true you have a single instruction and
say the x86 of the myips architecture
that can do a compare and the same thing
for swapping registers so perfectly
reasonable assumption that comparison
swaps for numbers are have exactly the
same cost but if you had a record and
you are comparing records and the
comparison function that you use for the
records was in itself a a method call or
a sub routine it's quite possible that
all you're doing is is swapping pointers
or references to do the swap but the
comparison could be substantially more
expensive okay um for the most of the
time and we'll differentiate if it
becomes necessary we're going to be
counting comparisons in the sorting
algorithms that we'll be putting out and
we'll be assuming that uh either you
know comparison swaps are are roughly
the same or that compares
are and we'll say which one of
course all that compares are
substantially more expensive than than
swaps okay so if you had either of those
cases for insertion sort you have a
Theta n Square algorithm all right you
have Theta n Square Compares and Theta n
Square
swaps now here's the
question let's say that
compares are more
expensive than
swaps and so I'm concerned about the
Theta n s comparison
cost I'm not as concerned because of the
constant factors involved with the Theta
n Square swap cost all right what's a
simple this is a cushion question okay
this um what's a what's a simple fix
change to this algorithm that would give
me a better complexity in the case where
Compares are more expensive or I'm only
looking at the complexity of Compares so
the Theta whatever of Compares right
anyone yeah back
there you could compare with the middle
what did I call call it what what what
is I I I called it something what you
just said I called it something yeah I
saw you first binary search that's right
two questions for this one all right so
you pick pick them up after after
lecture so you're exactly right you got
it right I called it binary search uh up
here okay um and so if if you you can
take insertion sord and you can sort of
trivially turn it into a Theta n log n
algorithm if you're talking about n
being the the number of pairs okay and
all you have to do to do that is to say
you know what I'm going to replace this
with binary
search and you can do that um and that
was the key
observation that because a of0 through
IUS one is already sorted right and so
you can do binary search on that part of
the array so let me just write that
down do a binary search
on a of 0 through
i-1 which is already
sorted and essentially you can think of
it as Theta log I
time and for each of those steps and so
then you get your Theta n log n
but okay now why can't I Thea log n in
terms of
Compares does this
help the
swaps for an array data
structure no because binary search will
require insertion into a of 0 through
IUS one right so here's the problem why
why don't we have a full-fledged Theta n
log n algorithm regardless of the cost
of Compares or swaps we don't quite have
that right we don't quite have that
because um we need to
insert our a of I into the right
position into a of uh Z through IUS one
when you do that if you have an array
structure it might get into the middle
and you have to shift things over to the
to the right and when you shift things
over to the right in the worst case you
may be shifting a lot of things over to
the right and that gives back to worst
case complexity of of theta n okay so so
a binary search in insertion sort gives
you Theta n log n for Compares but it's
still Theta and square for swaps all
right okay good so as you can see
there's many varieties of sorting
algorithms we just looked at a couple of
them and and they were both um insertion
sort the second one that I just put up
is uh I guess technically called binary
insertion sort uh because it does binary
search and the vanilla insertion sort is
the one that you have the code for in
the doc dis program or at least one of
the doc dis files
so let's move on and uh talk about uh a
different algorithm so what we'd like to
do now this is about this class is about
constant Improvement right you we're
never happy uh we always want to do a
little bit better right and eventually
once we run out of room from an asmic
standpoint you take these other classes
where you try and improve constant
factors and get 10% and 5% and 1% and so
on and so forth but we'll stick to uh
improving
uh asmic complexity and we're not quite
happy with uh binary insertion sort
because in the case of numbers our
binary insertion sort has Theta n Square
complexity if you look at swaps right so
we'd like to go find an algorithm that
is Theta n log n and and then I guess
eventually we'll have to stop but you
know Eric will take care of
that um there's a reason to stop it's
it's when you can prove that you can't
do any better right and so we'll get to
that
eventually so merge sort is also
something that You' probably
seen but there' probably be a couple of
subtleties that come out as I describ
this algorithm that hopefully will be
interesting to those of you who already
know mer sort and those of you who don't
it's a very pretty
algorithm um it's a standard
recursion algorithm recursive algorithm
so similar to a bind research uh what we
do here is we have an array a we split
it into two parts L and
R and essentially we kind of do no work
really uh in in terms of the L and R in
the sense that we just call we keep
splitting splitting splitting and all
the work is done down at the bottom in
this routine called merge where we are
merging a pair of elements at the leaves
and then we merge two pairs and get four
elements and then we
merge two four tles of elements Etc and
go all the way up so while I'm saying L
turns into L
Prime out
here there's no real explicit code that
you can see that turns L into L prime it
happens really later there's no real
sorting code here it happens in the
merge routine
and you'll see that quite clearly when
we run through an
example so you have L and R turn into L
Prime and L uh L Prime and R
Prime and what we end up getting is uh a
sorted
array
a and we have a what's called a merge
routine
that takes L Prime and RP Prime and
merges them into the sorted array so at
the top level what you see
is split into
two and do a merge and get to the SED
array the input is of size
n you have two
arrays of size n /
two these are two sorted arrays
of size n /2 and then finally you have a
sorted
array of size
n so if you want to follow the recursive
execution of this in a small
example then you'll be able to
see how this works and we'll do a fairly
straightforward example with eight
elements so at the top
level before we get there merge is going
to assume that you have two sorted
arrays and merge them
together that's the invariant in merge
sort or for the merge routine it assumes
the inputs are sorted L and R actually I
should say l Prime and R Prime so let's
say you have 20 13 7 and 2 you have 12
11 9 and 1 and this could be L Prime and
this could be R
Prime um what you have is what we call a
two finger algorithm and so you got two
fingers and each of them point to
something and in this case one of them
is pointing to L my left finger is
pointing to L prime or some element in L
Prime my right finger is pointing to
some element in R Prime and I'm going to
compare the two elements that my fingers
are pointing to
and I'm going to uh choose in this case
the smaller of those elements and I'm
going to put them into this the sorted
array okay so start out here uh I look
at that and that and I compared two and
one and which is smaller one is smaller
so I'm going to write one down so this
is
a two finger algo for merge and I put
one down when I put one down I have to
cross out one so effectively what
happens is let me just circle that
instead of Crossing it out and my finger
moves up to to nine okay so now I'm
pointing at two and nine and I repeat
this step right so now in this case two
is smaller so I'm going to go ahead and
write two down and I can cross out two
and move my finger up to to seven all
right and so that's it um I won't bore
you with the the rest of the steps it's
essentially walking up you have a couple
of pointers and you're walking up these
two arrays and you're writing down 1 2 7
9 11 12 13 20 okay and that's your merge
routine and all of the work really is
done in the merge routine because other
other than that the body is simply a
recursive call I mean you have to
obviously split the array but that's
fairly straightforward if you have an
array you know a zero through n then
depending on whether n
is odd or even you can imagine that you
set um L you know to be uh a 0 n by 2 -
one and R
similarly and so you just split it
halfway in the middle and I'll talk
about that a little bit more there's a
subtlety associated with that that we'll
get to uh in in in in a few minutes but
to finish up in terms of the computation
of merge sort this is it the merge
routine is doing
most if not all of the work and this
two-finger algorithm is going to be able
to take two sorted arrays and put them
into a single SED array by interspersing
or interleaving these elements and
what's the complexity of merge if um I
have you know two arrays of size n / two
here what do I
have yeah n all right uh we'll give you
a question
too Theta n
complexity so so far so good um it's a
little I know I know you know the answer
as to what the complexity of merge s is
but I'm guessing that most of you won't
be able to prove it to me because I'm
kind of a hard guy to prove something to
you anyway uh but and I could always say
no I don't I don't I don't believe you
what I don't understand right so uh so
it's it's
the complexity and and you've said this
before in class and I think Eric's
mentioned it the overall complexity of
this algorithm is Theta n log n okay and
where does that come from how do you
prove that and so what we'll do now is
take a look at merge sord and we'll look
at a recursion tree and we'll try and
there many ways of proving that merge
sort is Theta and log n uh the way we're
going to do this is uh what's called you
know proof by picture um and it's not
established proof technique uh but it's
something that uh uh is very helpful to
get an intuition behind behind the proof
and why the result is true right so and
you can always take that and you can
formalize it and make this
U make this something that uh everyone
believes and you can we'll also look at
uh substitution possibly in section
tomorrow for recurrent solving so where
we at right now is that we have a divid
and concer
algorithm that has a merge
step that is Theta
n and so if I just look at this
structure that I have here I can write a
recurrence for merge short that looks
like this so when I say
complexity I can say t of n which is the
work done for n items is going to be
some constant time
in order
to divide the array so this could be the
part corresponding to dividing the
array and there's going to be two
problems of size n /2 and so I have 2 T
of N /2 and this is the recursive
part and I'm going to have C * n which
is the merg
part okay and that's some constant times
n which is um
what uh we have here with respect to the
Theta n
complexity so you have a recurrence like
this and and I know you've some of you
have seen recurrences in 6042 and you
know how to solve this what I like to do
is show you this recursion tree
expansion that not only tells you how to
solve this recurrence but also gives
you a a means of solving recurrences
where instead of having C of n you have
something else out here you have F ofn
which is a different function from the
linear function and this recursion tree
is in my mind the the simplest way of
arguing the Theta n log n complexity of
merge sord right so what I want to do is
expand this recurrence out and let's do
that over here
so I have C of n on
top um I'm going to
ignore uh this constant Factor because C
ofn dominates so I just start with c ofn
i I want to break things
up as I do the recursion so when I go C
of n at the top level that's the work I
have to do at the merg at the top level
and then when I go down to two smaller
problems each of them is size n /2 so I
do CF C * n excuse me divided by two
work so this is just a constant c um it
just represents I don't want to write
thetas up here you could um and I'll say
a little bit more about that later but
but think of this CN as representing the
Theta n complexity and C is this
constant so C of C * n here C * n /2
here and then when I keep going I have C
of C * n over 4 C * n over 4
Etc and so on and so forth and when I
come down all the way here n is
eventually going to become
one or essentially a constant and I'm
going to have a bunch of C's here all
right so here's another
question that I'd like you to answer
someone tell me what the number of
levels in this tree are precisely and
the number of leaves in this tree are
precisely
yeah log n+ 1 log to the base 2 + 1 yeah
and the number of
leaves yeah you want you raise your hand
back there first number of leaves think
yeah you're right you think right okay
so 1 + log
n and n
leaves all right then n n becomes one
you know how many of them do you have
you're down to a a single element which
is uh by definition sorted and uh you
have end leaves right so now let's add
up the work right so this is I really
like this uh picture because it's just
so in intuitive in terms of getting us
the result that we're looking for right
so you add up the work in each of the
each of of the levels of this tree all
right so the top level is CN the second
level is CN because I added half and
half
CN CN wow what
symmetry okay so you're
doing the same amount of
work modu of you know the constant
factors here with uh with what's going
on with the C1 which we've ignored but
roughly the same amount of work in each
of the levels right and now you know how
many levels there are it's uh 1+ log n
so if you want to
write an equation for T of
n it's you know 1
+ log
n
times C of n which is Theta of n log
n all right so I've fxed in constant C
and thetas they're for the purposes of
this description they're interchangeable
you will see recurrences that look like
this in
class and things like that um don't get
confused um it's just a constant
multiplicative factor in front of the
function that you have and it's just a
little easier I think to write down
these constant factors factors and
realize that the amount of work done is
the same in each of the leaves and once
you know the dimensions of this tree in
terms of levels and in terms of the
number of leaves you get your you get
your result all
right so we've looked at two algorithms
so
far and insertion sort if you talk about
numbers is Theta n Square for swaps
merge sort is Theta n log n um here's
another interesting question what is one
advantage of insertion sort over merge
sord
yeah what is that
mean that's exactly right that's exactly
right um so the the two guys who
answered the questions before with the
levels and you come out come to me after
class uh so that's a great answer uh
it's in place sorting is something that
has to do with auxiliary space and so
what you see here and it was a bit bit
hidden here but the fact of the matter
is that uh you had LP Prime and R Prime
and L Prime and RP Prime are different
from L and R which were the initial
halves of the inputs to the Sorting
algorithm right and what I said here is
we're going to dump this into a that's
what this picture shows this says sorted
array a and so you had to make a copy of
the
array in the two halves L and R in order
to do the recursion and then to take the
results and put them into the sorted
array a so you need needed in merge sort
you needed Theta
n auxiliary
space so merge sort you need Theta
n extra space and the definition of in
place
sorting implies that you have Theta one
constant auxilary space
okay the auxiliary space for insertion
sord is simply that you know temporary
variable uh that you need when you swap
two elements right so when you want to
swap a couple of resistors you got to
store one of the values in a temporary
location override the other Etc and
that's the Theta 1 auxiliary space for
insertion sort so there is an advantage
of the version of insertion sort we've
talked about today over merge sort and
if you have a billion elements you know
that's potentially something you don't
want to store in memory if you want to
do something really fast and store do
everything everything in in cash or main
memory and you want to sort billions or
maybe even trillions of items this
becomes an an important
consideration um I will say that um you
can uh reduce the constant factor of the
Theta n so in the vanilla scheme you
could imagine that you have to have a
copy of the array so if you had n
elements you essentially have n extra uh
items of storage you can make that n /
two with a simple coding trick by
keeping 1 half of a uh the you can sort
of throw away one of the L's or one of
the RS and you can get it down to n/2
and that turns out it's a reasonable
thing to do if you have a billion
elements and you want to reduce your
your storage by a constant Factor so
that's one coding trick now it turns out
that you can actually go further and
there's a fairly sophisticated algorithm
that sort of beyond the scope of 66
that's an in place merge sort
and this in place merge sort is kind of
Impractical uh in the sense that um it
doesn't do very well in terms of the
constant Factor so while it's in place
and it's still Theta n log n uh the
problem is that the uh that the running
time of an inplace merge sord is much
worse than the regular merge sort that
uses Theta n auxiliary space so people
don't really use in place mer it's a
great paper it's it's it's a great thing
to read um it's a analysis uh uh is is a
bit sophisticated or for6 so we won't we
won't go there but it does exist so you
can take merge sword and I just want to
let you know that you can do things in
place um in terms of
numbers some experiments uh we ran uh a
few years ago so these may not be
completely valid because I'm going to
actually give you numbers but merge
s in
Python if you if you write
um a little curvefit program to do this
is
2.2 n log n micros seconds okay for a
given n right so this is the merge start
routine uh let
me and if you look at a insertion sort
in Python
that's something like 0 2 N sare
microc okay so you see the the constant
factors here if you do insertion sord in
C which is a compiled
language then I it's it's much faster
it's about um 20 times
faster it's 01 n² microsc okay so a
little bit of practice on the side we do
ask you to write code and this is
important the reason we're interested in
algorithms is because people want to run
them and what you can see um is that you
can actually um find an N so regardless
of whether your python or C this sort of
tells you that asmic complexity is is
pretty important because once n gets
Beyond about uh 4,000 uh you're going to
see that mer merge s in Python you know
beats insertion sort in C right so so
the constant factors get uh
subsumed Beyond certain values of n so
that's why asmic complexity is is
important and you do have a factor of 20
here but that doesn't really help you in
terms of keeping an nsquare algorithm
competitive it stays competitive for a
little bit longer but then falls behind
all
right okay so that's what I wanted to
cover for sorting so hopefully you have
a sense of what happens with these two
sorting algorithms we'll look at a very
different sorting algorithm next time
using heaps which is a different data
structure um the last thing I want to do
in the couple of minutes I have left is
give you a little more intuition as to
recurrence solving based on this diagram
that I wrote up there and so we're going
to use exactly this structure and we're
going to look at a couple of different
recurrences that I won't really motivate
in terms of having a specific algorithm
but um I'll just write out the
recurrence and um we'll look at the
we'll look at the recursion tree for
that and I'll I'll try
and tease out of you the complexity
associated with these recurrences or the
overall
complexity so let's take a look at T of
n
equals 2 T of n / 2 2 plus C
n² Okay C * n let me just call that CN
no need for the
brackets so constant C * n s so if you
had a crummy merge routine and it was
taking n square and you coded it up
wrong you know that would be uh it's not
a great motivation for this recurrence
but it's it is way this recurrence could
have come up all right so what does this
uh this recursive tree look like
well it looks kind of the same obviously
you have CN squ you have CN Square ID 4
CN Square divid 4 CN squ ID
16 four
times looking a little bit different
from the other one um the levels and the
leaves are exactly the same eventually n
is going to go down to one so you will
see C all the way here and you're going
to have n leaves
and you will have you know as before 1
plus log n
levels everything is the same right and
this is why I like this recursive tree
formulation so much because now all I
have to do is add up the work associated
with each of the levels to get the
solution to the recurrence right now
take a look at what happens here CN s CN
s divid by
2 CN 2 /
4 and this is n *
C
right so what does that add up to
yeah yeah exactly exactly right so if
you look at what happens here this
dominates all of the other things are
actually less than that okay and you
said bounded by 2 CN Square because this
part is bounded by CN s and you already
have CN square up at the top right so
this particular algor that corresponds
to this crummy merge sort or wherever
this recurrence came
from
is a Theta n Square algorithm and in
this case all of the work done is at the
root at the top level of the recursion
okay here there was roughly equal amount
of work done in each of the different
levels all right
here all of the work was done at the
root okay and so to close up shop here
let me just give you real quick a
recurrence where all of the work is done
at the
leaves just for
closure so if I had magically a a merge
routine that actually happened in
constant time either through you know
buggy analysis or because it was buggy
uh then what does the tree look like for
that and I can think of this as being
you know Theta 1 or I can think of this
as being just a constant C I'll stick
with that so I have
c c
c and well I tried to move that up that
doesn't work uh so I have n leaves as
before and so if I look at what I have
here I have C at the top level I have 2
c um and so on and so forth 4 C and then
I I go all the way down to
NC all right and so what happens here is
this
dominates and so in this
recurrence the whole thing runs in Theta
n so what the solution to that is Theta
n and what you have here
is all of the work being done at the
leaves all right um we're not going to
really cover this this theorem that
that gives you a mechanical way of
figuring this out because we think the
recursive tree is the is a better way of
looking at it but you can see that
depending on what that function is in
terms of the work being done in the
merge routine you'd have different
versions of recurrences all right I'll
stick around and people who answered
questions please pick up your cushions
see you next time